The Joe Rogan experience. Now,
when the first day you actually got up there,
was that the first time you had ever been in space?
On my first mission. Yeah, the first, yeah, it was first time in space.
So your first view.
Of the earth from above.
What's that right there. Yeah. He's not like, wow, well,
I didn't see it right away. Cause I was in the mid deck,
the downstairs of the shuttle and there's only one window down there and it's in
a corner. Okay.
So it's in a hatch and it's like the size of a dinner plate and
I was up there. You got a lot of work to do when you,
as soon as you get up there. So I'm working like crazy.
And after about 30 minutes,
I see this pale blue glow come from that window. And I'm like,
that's the earth? You know, I should have a look at that.
And I was super excited for this, you know, so I wanted to be ready. So I pause,
I closed my eyes, I'd meditated, you know, call it whatever you want.
I just got ready. And when I felt like I was ready,
I floated up to that window and I opened up my eyes and I gazed
out for the very first time at the earth from space.
And what that felt like is, is really,
really hard to describe in words.
But if I had to pick one word to describe what it was feeling at that moment,
it would be man, really?
Man.
Just man, just man. I mean, it was all right. It was pretty,
it had a lot like those earth colors, like blues and greens. Right. But man,
we've all seen pictures of the earth from space. Okay. I mean,
we got like HD video coming down from space now where it's just spectacular.
You could see stuff in that video that you can't even see with your own eyes.
Like, uh, like the Aurora and all that.
And I'm sure like John Glenn and like Yuri, Gagarin had no idea what to expect.
And so when they looked out and they saw the earth, they freaked out, you know,
and it, and it was amazing and it was beautiful, but it was,
it was underwhelming. I guess my expectations are so high.
Like I felt like there should be like some heavenly choir and that we should all
hold hands and sing kumbaya.
Yeah. Most people that have done it.
They talk about this realization that you like,
this inescapable realization that we're all on this thing together
and that all these boundaries of civilizations and cultures and
countries and continents are all nonsense.
We're really just all in this one thing together.
Yeah. They call that the overview effect.
And a lot of guys come back and talk about that and they really feel it.
And they talk about a world without borders and you know,
and it's a beautiful sentiment. And I, and I don't,
I don't want to knock that in any way because it's like,
like really what'd you expect this?
You expect to look down and see like dotted lines between trees. You know,
really like, uh, you know, I guess you do, you,
it's inescapable when you look down and you see the planet and you realize that
we're all in the same boat, you know, but, uh,
that didn't strike me as a,
as a sudden realization because I think it was because I knew that before I went
it,
you shouldn't have to go and strap into a rocket and blast off and look at Derek
and know that basically we're all human beings. I think. I mean,
I think the things that unite us are so much stronger and more important than
the, than the crazy little things that divide us,
like race or sex or nationality or politics or whatever. Um,
and, and you, at the end of the day, we have this one home and,
and we're all stuck here in it together.
So I had that strong knowledge before I
went. And maybe that's why when I looked down, I'm like, yeah, there it is.
Okay. I get it. But it wasn't like all of a sudden,
like the shade was pulled back and there was like suddenly a
new realization about life.
Is there one place that's the spot on the space station to get the view where
you really get a big window.
There's a huge window, uh,
called a coupla that wasn't there in my first mission,
but it was there my second mission.
So I got to see it the second time I added a window. Yeah.
It's like, Hmm, let's get the saws all and put that.
How do you add a window to the space station?
You just, you know, get the, now it's, uh, they added a whole module.
And then I had had this coupla, which is like a, is.
That it right there.
Though? You're looking through it. That's exactly it. Yeah. Wow.
So this was pretty.
Tight. It's like a, it's a dome.
And so you get the full 360 view and it's spectacular. Wow.
And we tell the guys that don't get to do a spacewalk,
that this view is just as good as doing a space walk, but it's.
Not, it's not.
It's not, but don't tell them because it, it makes them feel better.
Listen, what is the space walk like?
Oh man. Well,
first I got to tell you that the likelihood of me doing a spacewalk was like
slim to none. Uh, w when I first got there,
they tell you that when you're interviewing to become an astronaut to go talk to
some of the other astronauts.
And so I went in there and we had this presentation about space walking,
and it seemed like to be the, like the ultimate experience,
just an incredible thing. And I wanted to do it bad.
So I went, I'm talking to this one. Astronaut is a pretty tall guy. Um,
those are the can't tell from the podcast. I'm, I'm five, four. Okay.
So I'm not like, not like a real towering individual,
little vertically challenged, I guess.
And I'm talking to this real tall astronaut. And I said, you know,
just heard about the spacewalk. It sounds awesome.
I wa I I've been living in California. I've been doing like some rock climbing,
some scuba diving, maybe that make me a good candidate to do a spacewalk.
And this tall astronaut looked at me like right in the eye.
And he laughed in my face. He said,
what are you four foot? What, how rude?
I know my, my first thought was, you know,
I thought astronauts was supposed to be polite. And this guy like,
was not being nice, but he was, he was actually just being brutally honest,
you know, it was kind of tough love. And he was like, listen,
the suit is one size fits all. You're going to get in that thing.
And it's going to swallow you up and you're not gonna be able to do anything.
You're going to be useless. So this is an impossible forget about it.
So I was kind of off, but, uh, but I wasn't gonna let this guy stop me. Right.
So I get there, I got the job and I go down for my first training exercise,
which was in this huge pool. We got in Houston and it's like, uh,
it's a hundred feet wide, 200 feet long, 40 feet deep.
And we could fit like most of the space station in there.
And they get a crane that comes by, they put you in a suit which weighs,
you know, something like 175 pounds and stuff. And then in addition, you,
you're in a two,
it picks you up and they plop you in the water and you float around.
And it's kind of like being up in space. And that's how we train.
So get down there as my first, very first exercise.
And I could tell in the first five minutes of this training exercise, that big,
tall astronaut that laughed in my face was right.
I was not, I was failing. I was, I was not doing well. I was, uh,
I was screwing up. I was like, it just, wasn't going, well, why do they.
Make a one size fits all suit? It.
Seems they have the ability to alter the arms and the legs a little
bit. And they have, um, it's actually three different size, upper torsos.
There's a, there's a medium, a large and an extra large,
but that said it's limited.
And because of cost a lot of money to make different sizes.
So there's only the gloves that can tailor.
Cause that's actually the most important thing. But, um, I'm getting my bucket,
you know, and I, and I got a needs improvement,
which is a NASA nice way of saying you failed. Right. But I,
I wasn't ready to give up. I went and, uh,
I knew I was going to need help. So I talked to, um,
the people that make the suit and it did some of those things. So they, like,
they shorten up the arms, they fixed it up a little bit for me.
And then I talked to the, the trainers and we said, okay, yeah,
we gotta think outside the box here. If we give you the standard procedure,
you're going to be at a disadvantage,
but maybe we change your body positions instead of going straight onto the work
site. Maybe we come at the worksite from the size to get more, reach that way.
And we started working at it and we got better and better.
And the end of the story is that, uh, I got to,
eventually I got the highest possible qualification to do the most complicated
spacewalks we do. And I ended up doing three different spacewalks.
And of course my career and a big tall guy that laughed in my face.
It didn't get to do any.
Yeah. It's your gift for talking, sir. Look at you out there.
Yeah. That's.
Me now. What is that feeling like?
Because it's got to feel insane when you're strapped to a space
station that's floating around and you're, you're just hanging by a cord.
Yeah.
Well,
you're holding on tight and then you do have that safety tether that you say
there and, and, uh, uh, you know,
they can prepare you for everything except for the visual.
So when you like her in the pool,
you're staring at the pool wall and when you get up there and you see the whole
earth below you,
some people go out there and get like a sense of fear of falling. Um,
of course you, if you let go, you're not going anywhere, right?
The space station is moving 17,500 miles an hour. But so are you,
so it's kind of like doing a wink, wingwalking on an airplane,
but with no air to blow you off the wing.
So when you look at the space station is rock solid,
but you look down and some people get the fear of falling.
And then they hold on real tight, which is a terrible,
terrible mistake because we call it space walking, but you're not walking.
You're, you're doing everything with your arms so you can wear.
Your arms out. Exactly.
Uh, so now if you're you're climbing and you get like kinda,
totally thrashed and your forearms and it,
now you get that claw hand and it's useless. Yeah. You can do that.
And you got like seven and a half hours to go and that's bad.
So, so you're out there for seven and a half hours. Yeah.
What if you have to pee.
Diaper diaper.
Yeah. Poop.
As well. Try to avoid that. I.
Do your best.
Yeah. As a, as a scientist, I had to experiment. Right? Of course.
So during a training exercise, I waited till the very end, just in case,
you know, and I let one go, uh,
right before they pulled me out of the pool one day and I resolved never,
ever to do that again.
Is that number one? And number two, number two.
Boy, number one is no big deal.
What saved that project? I,
I wish I could have told you what was going to happen. That's disgusting.
And you're doing it in the pool too.
You're not doing it in actual space space to be one of the rare people that it's
actually pooped in space. It would be very interesting.
That's uh, that's, you know, we keep all these records. I don't know.
Who's got that record. It's not me.
Yeah. So you just have to let it go when you're up there. Yeah. So what, uh,
what are you doing when you're out there?
So if you're doing seven and a half hours worth of work.
You're, you're basically doing maintenance.
So it's kind of like being a mechanic or a technician the way I describe it.
But the suit is like so hard. It restricts everything you do,
because it was blown up to about four pounds per square inch. And so even,
um, just closing your fists takes work because the suits like a balloon,
it wants to stay like this. And so just closing your fingers is,
is takes effort. And over seven and a half hours, it gets really fatiguing.
You're moving your arms. Everything is, and the suit can only move.
Like you can't do this. Right. You can do this, maybe. So your, your,
your ability to up your shoulders is really limited.
So you're trying to do all this work, but you're working inside this suit.
And I described it as like,
it's like trying to change the oil in your car while wearing a medieval suit of
armor. It's hard. What,
what kind of maintenance are you doing on the outside of the spaceship? Uh,
you know, we're cleaning the windows, getting the bugs off and like, no, we're,
uh, oh yeah. That's another, on this particular spacewalk,
we're assembling a robot, uh, that we took up there, but we did other things.
Like we put a new antenna on top of the space station. We, um,
H swapped out a bunch of batteries that were getting old, um, you know,
stuff like that.